feat(docs): add recipes section (#1133)
wasmCloud/wasmCloud.com: docs/recipes/inject-configuration-from-configmaps-and-secrets.mdx

---
title: 'Inject Configuration from ConfigMaps and Secrets'
description: 'Provide runtime configuration to a component from inline values, ConfigMaps, and Secrets'
---

> This recipe walks through providing runtime configuration to a wasmCloud component from three sources: inline key-value pairs, Kubernetes ConfigMaps, and Kubernetes Secrets. All three are delivered to the component through the same interface, `wasi:cli/environment`, so the component reads them the same way regardless of source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This recipe walks through providing runtime configuration to a wasmCloud component via three sources:
1. Inline key-value pairs
2. Kubernetes ConfigMaps
3. Kubernetes Secrets

Configuration from all three sources are delivered to the component through the same interface, `wasi:cli/environment`, so the component reads them the same way regardless of source.
```

Might be too much but I do like the explicit list, what do you think? The prose might be better actually

By the end, you will have a component that reads configuration values from all three sources, with a clear understanding of how precedence works when keys overlap.

## Prerequisites

- A Kubernetes cluster with wasmCloud installed via the [Helm chart](../kubernetes-operator/index.mdx)
- [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl)
- A component that reads `wasi:cli/environment` (see [Configuration](../wash/developer-guide/language-support/typescript/configuration.mdx) for a TypeScript walkthrough, or use the example below)

## How it works

The `localResources.environment` field on a component accepts three sub-fields:

| Field | Source | Precedence |
|---|---|---|
| `config` | Inline key-value pairs in the manifest | Lowest |
| `configFrom` | References to Kubernetes ConfigMaps | Middle |
| `secretFrom` | References to Kubernetes Secrets | Highest |

All keys from all sources are merged into a single set of environment variables. When the same key appears in more than one source, the source with higher precedence wins. Within a single source (e.g. multiple ConfigMaps in `configFrom`), the last entry in the list wins.

> The component reads the merged values by calling `getEnvironment()` from `wasi:cli/environment`, which returns all key-value pairs as an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components can read the merged values by calling `getEnvironment()` (a part of the [`wasi:cli/environment` interface](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/tree/main/proposals/cli)), which returns all key-value pairs as an array.
```

        - namespace: wasi
          package: http
          interfaces:
            - incoming-handler
          config:
            host: localhost
EOF
```

## Step 4: Understand precedence

In the manifest above, `LOG_LEVEL` appears in two sources:

- `config` (inline) sets it to `"debug"`
- `configFrom` references `app-config`, which sets it to `"info"`

Because `configFrom` has higher precedence than `config`, the component receives `LOG_LEVEL=info`.

The full set of values the component receives:

| Key | Value | Source | Why |
|---|---|---|---|
| `REGION` | `us-east-1` | `config` | Only appears in inline config |
| `LOG_LEVEL` | `info` | `configFrom` | ConfigMap overrides inline |
| `APP_NAME` | `My Service` | `configFrom` | Only appears in ConfigMap |
| `UPSTREAM_URL` | `https://api.example.com` | `configFrom` | Only appears in ConfigMap |
| `API_KEY` | `sk-example-key-12345` | `secretFrom` | Only appears in Secret |
| `DB_PASSWORD` | `supersecret` | `secretFrom` | Only appears in Secret |

If `app-secrets` also contained a `LOG_LEVEL` key, the Secret value would win over both the inline and ConfigMap values.

## Reading configuration in component code

> ### Rust

Reviewer: We could use the multi language code boxes here?
